Add DBOS Task Scheduler to examples (#312)
dbos-inc/dbos-docs: docs/typescript/examples/task-scheduler.md

---
displayed_sidebar: examplesSidebar
sidebar_position: 20
title: DBOS Task Scheduler
description: Learn how to combine DBOS + Next.js with this cloud scheduling tool
---

import LocalPostgres from '/docs/partials/_local_postgres.mdx';

# DBOS Task Scheduler
DBOS Task Scheduler is a full-stack app built with [Next.js](https://nextjs.org/) and [DBOS](https://dbos.dev).  It serves as both a demo for learning DBOS concepts and a template for building your own DBOS-powered Next.js applications.

:::tip

> For general information about integrating DBOS with Next.js, see ["Adding DBOS to Next.js Apps"](../../integrations/adding-dbos-to-next.md) in the integration guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For general information about integrating DBOS with Next.js, see ["Adding DBOS to Next.js Apps"](../../integrations/adding-dbos-to-next.md).
```

---
displayed_sidebar: examplesSidebar
sidebar_position: 20
title: DBOS Task Scheduler
description: Learn how to combine DBOS + Next.js with this cloud scheduling tool
---

import LocalPostgres from '/docs/partials/_local_postgres.mdx';

# DBOS Task Scheduler
DBOS Task Scheduler is a full-stack app built with [Next.js](https://nextjs.org/) and [DBOS](https://dbos.dev).  It serves as both a demo for learning DBOS concepts and a template for building your own DBOS-powered Next.js applications.

:::tip
For general information about integrating DBOS with Next.js, see ["Adding DBOS to Next.js Apps"](../../integrations/adding-dbos-to-next.md) in the integration guide.
:::

![Screen shot of DBOS Task Scheduler](./assets/dbos-task-scheduler-main.png)

If you like the idea of a cloud-based task scheduler with a calendar UI, you can easily [customize it with your own tasks](#task-code) and deploy it to [DBOS Cloud](https://www.dbos.dev/dbos-cloud) for free.

> # Using DBOS Task Scheduler

Reviewer: Remove this heading?

## Running DBOS Task Scheduler in DBOS Cloud
Provisioning an instance of DBOS Task Scheduler in DBOS Cloud is easy:
- Go to [DBOS Cloud Console](https://console.dbos.dev/launch)
- Sign Up or Sign In, if you haven't already
- Select the "TYPESCRIPT" tab
- Choose the "DBOS Task Scheduler" template

After a bit of launch activity, you will be presented with:
- A URL for accessing the app
- Monitoring dashboards
- Management options
- Code download

## Running DBOS Task Scheduler Locally
If you [started out in DBOS Cloud](#running-dbos-task-scheduler-in-dbos-cloud), you can download your code to your development environment.  Or, you can [clone the code from the git repository](https://github.com/dbos-inc/dbos-demo-apps) and change to the `typescript/nextjs-calendar` directory.

### Setting Up A Database
DBOS requires a Postgres database.  If your local environment is set up with database connection settings, these will be used.  You can also start a Postgres docker image, or provision a cloud instance of Postgres.

> <LocalPostgres/>

Reviewer: Let's remove this and replace it with:

"DBOS will automatically guide you through connecting to your app to a Postgres database."

after they start DBOS. It's what our other guides say and it's much simpler and clearer in my opinion. So far we haven't had any customer complaints about the automatic connection experience, while we got a  lot of complaints about this block.

Reviewer: Yeah, we're addressing that right now with the new configuration work, where you can just pass in database URL to `DBOS.launch()` instead of fiddling with the YAML file. So after that's done we can greatly simplify the documentation around connecting to existing databases.

Can you try the wizard again? If it doesn't work, we need to know and fix that ASAP.

Author: > Can you try the wizard again? If it doesn't work, we need to know and fix that ASAP.

As near as I can tell, it gins up a postgres config out of nothing.  Then it finds there is a PG there, but it can't connect.  So then there's a very abridged error message about that, nothing else, no advice.  It'd be nice if it said:

No database explicitly provided.  Database wizard trying to find one.  (Link to doc about this)
Attempting to connect to local PG using default PG settings ... database found, password incorrect.
Not attempting further wizard steps.
  Please provide a password in PGPASSWORD if you want to use the local database found
  If you wish to use a different database entirely, please fill in `dbos-config.yaml` appropriately
  If you wish to use the wizard ... too bad!  No wizard for you!  (Unless you shut down this PG we found.)

Reviewer: Yeah, I think we're in agreement here, moving config to `DBOS.launch()` will make things easy to experienced users&mdash;we just have to do a really good job documenting that once it's done (much better than we're doing right now).

    name: 'Fetch Random Joke', // Text label the task
    url: 'https://official-joke-api.appspot.com/random_joke', // URL to fetch when the task runs
    type: 'json', // Type of result to expect from the task
  },
```

### Main Workflow
The main workflow for executing tasks is in `src/dbos/operations.ts`, in the `SchedulerOps` class:

```typescript
  @DBOS.workflow()
  static async runJob(sched: string, task: string, time: Date) {
    DBOS.logger.info(`Running ${task} at ${time.toString()}`);

    let resstr = "";
    let errstr = "";

    try {
      // Fetch the result
      const res = await SchedulerOps.runTask(task);
      resstr = res;

      // Store result in database
      await ScheduleDBOps.setResult(sched, task, time, res, '');
    }
    catch (e) {
      const err = e as Error;
      // Store error in database
      await ScheduleDBOps.setResult(sched, task, time, '', err.message);
      errstr = err.message;
    }

    // Tell attached clients
    SchedulerOps.notifyListeners('result');

    // Send notification
    await SchedulerOps.sendStatusEmail(
      errstr ? `Task ${task} failed` : `Task ${task} result`,
      errstr || resstr
    );
  }
```

> While it may be overkill for this demo application, `runJob` will be executed durably.  That is, if the server crashes after `runTask` is complete, but the result hasn't been recorded in the database with `setResult`, or if the email hasn't been sent by `sendStatusEmail`, DBOS Transact will finish the workflow during recovery and execute those steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because `runJob` is a DBOS workflow, it is executed durably.  That is, if the server crashes after `runTask` is complete, but the result hasn't been recorded in the database with `setResult`, or if the email hasn't been sent by `sendStatusEmail`, DBOS Transact will finish the workflow during recovery and execute those steps.
```

Being more positive :)

### Scheduling

Scheduling a workflow in DBOS is quite simple; simply affix the [`@DBOS.scheduled` decorator](https://docs.dbos.dev/typescript/tutorials/scheduled-workflows).  The `crontab` of `'* * * * *'` will cause `runSchedule` to execute every minute, and `runSchedule` will check the database for tasks to execute.

```typescript
  @DBOS.scheduled({crontab: '* * * * *', mode: SchedulerMode.ExactlyOncePerIntervalWhenActive })
  @DBOS.workflow()

>   static async runSchedule(schedTime: Date, _atTime: Date) { /*...*/ }

Reviewer: Do we want to show the code?  This is the main loop of the app, which seems quite important.

- External systems integration – [Place calls to external services](https://docs.dbos.dev/typescript/tutorials/step-tutorial) with much simpler error recovery.
- Simple, powerful database integration – [Manage database data](https://docs.dbos.dev/typescript/tutorials/transaction-tutorial) with DBOS.
- Cron-style task scheduling – Automate recurring jobs with [cron-like scheduling](https://docs.dbos.dev/typescript/tutorials/scheduled-workflows).
- Built-in tracing and replay debugging – [Find workflows in the dashboard](https://docs.dbos.dev/cloud-tutorials/monitoring-dashboard) and [re-run them locally](https://docs.dbos.dev/cloud-tutorials/timetravel-debugging).

# Running DBOS Task Scheduler
![Screen shot of DBOS Task Scheduler](./assets/dbos-task-scheduler-main.png)

## Running DBOS Task Scheduler in DBOS Cloud
Provisioning an instance of DBOS Task Scheduler in DBOS Cloud is easy:
- Go to [DBOS Cloud Console](https://console.dbos.dev/launch)
- Sign Up or Sign In, if you haven't already
- Select the "TYPESCRIPT" tab
- Choose the "DBOS Task Scheduler" template

> After a bit of launch activity, you will be presented with:

Reviewer 2: The app is only deployable through Github -- we should say something about it

Author: Is that true - I didn't fint it to be true yesterday ... it worked fine without GitHub.

Reviewer 2: ![Screenshot 2025-03-05 at 12 05 27](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/c3baf5d3-db8e-4fd6-bbba-36f212d59f56)

Author: Are you already signed in w/ GitHub?  I am not and I get options...
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f4ffc204-fbf0-4429-ad84-4a6a54fbc107)

Reviewer 2: I was! I guess that's the issue ..

- A URL for accessing the app
- Monitoring dashboards
- Management options
- Code download

## Running DBOS Task Scheduler Locally
If you [started out in DBOS Cloud](#running-dbos-task-scheduler-in-dbos-cloud), you can download your code to continue local development.  Or, you can [clone the code from the git repository](https://github.com/dbos-inc/dbos-demo-apps) and change to the `typescript/nextjs-calendar` directory.

Once you have a local copy of the DBOS Task Scheduler, run the following:

```
npm install
npm run dev
```

> Note that this requires a Postgres database.  If your local environment is set up with database connection settings, these will be used.  Otherwise, the database wizard will try to start a Postgres docker image, or provision a cloud instance of Postgres for you.

Reviewer 2: - what are `database connection settings`?
- Unclear what is `the database wizard` --- I realize we have no docs about it. Maybe we can pun out further and say `a database wizard will...`

Author: This is a reflection of the current situation ... I don't actually know what you're supposed to do, and doc is limited.  The tutorial manages to use the database (mysteriously) in steps 2-4, revealing it partially in step 5.  https://docs.dbos.dev/typescript/programming-guide

Author: Imported the shared database snippet from the .mdx file, this is better than what I had, and then there is only one place to improve going forward.

### Viewing Results
To view results and errors, click on the result calendar items.

![Screen shot of popup for viewing results](./assets/dbos-task-scheduler-result-box.png)

## Setting Up Email Notifications
The DBOS Task Scheduler app will send notifications using Amazon Simple Email Service (SES).  To use this, set the following environment variables:
- AWS_REGION: The AWS region for SES service
- AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID: The AWS access key provisioned for SES access
- AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY: The access secret corresponding to AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID
- REPORT_EMAIL_FROM_ADDRESS: The email address to use as the "from" address for results reports
- REPORT_EMAIL_TO_ADDRESS: The email address to use as the "to" address for results reports

# Code Tour

## Technologies and Concepts Demonstrated
::::tip
The DBOS Task Scheduler app is somewhat complex, showcasing many features.  For a simpler starting point, see [dbos-nextjs-starter](https://github.com/dbos-inc/dbos-demo-apps/tree/main/typescript/dbos-nextjs-starter#readme).
::::

This app uses the following:

> - [DBOS Workflows, Transactions, and Steps](../tutorials/step-tutorial.md) – Complete actions exactly once, record the results, and send notifications, without worrying about server disruptions

Reviewer 2: Let's link to each doc page?

DBOS provides a much simpler way to register API endpoints.

By simply decorating a method with [`@DBOS.getAPI`](https://docs.dbos.dev/typescript/tutorials/requestsandevents/http-serving-tutorial), the API will be available, with built-in type checking, and available for OpenAPI support.  The following registers the API at `/dbos/boredapi/activity`:

```typescript
  @DBOS.getApi('/dbos/boredapi/activity')
  static async boredAPIActivity() {
    return await DBOSBored.getActivity();
  }
```

### WebSockets
Another thing that is not generally possible in Next.js is real-time updates to the client.  In DBOS Task Scheduler, the client calendar should be updated when new task results arrive, or if another user alters the calendar.  While this can be achieved with polling, we can use WebSockets in DBOS.

```typescript
  static notifyListeners(type: string) {
    const gss = (globalThis as SchedulerAppGlobals).webSocketClients;
    DBOS.logger.debug(`WebSockets: Sending update '${type}' to ${gss?.size} clients`);
    gss?.forEach((client) => {
      if (client.readyState === WebSocket.OPEN) {
        client.send(JSON.stringify({type}));
      }
    });
  }
```

### Database Notifications

> While WebSockets can be used to deliver notifications from DBOS to the client, a challenge arises if the database update was running on another viratual machine in the application group.  To detect this, we can watch for changes in the underlying database table, and use those updates to broadcast notifications to the WebSockets.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While WebSockets can be used to deliver notifications from DBOS to the client, a challenge arises if the database update was running on another virtual machine in the application group.  To detect this, we can watch for changes in the underlying database table, and use those updates to broadcast notifications to the WebSockets.
```

---
displayed_sidebar: examplesSidebar
sidebar_position: 20
title: DBOS Task Scheduler
description: Learn how to combine DBOS + Next.js with this cloud scheduling tool
---

# DBOS Task Scheduler
DBOS Task Scheduler is a full-stack app built with [Next.js](https://nextjs.org/) and [DBOS](https://dbos.dev).  It serves as both a demo for learning DBOS concepts and a template for building your own DBOS-powered Next.js applications.

If you like the idea of a cloud-based task scheduler with a calendar UI, you can easily [customize it with your own tasks](#task-code) and deploy it to [DBOS Cloud](https://www.dbos.dev/dbos-cloud) for free.

![Screen shot of DBOS Task Scheduler](./assets/dbos-task-scheduler-main.png)

## Why Use Next.js With DBOS?

> DBOS Transact + Next.js is a powerful backend and frontend pairing that is easily deployed to DBOS Cloud or other clouds that allow long-lived server-side jobs.

Reviewer: This section should be combined with the introduction and written as "Why Use DBOS With Next.js" since most people are going to be coming from Next.js and evaluating DBOS.

Author: Can do.

Many existing Next.js hosting options focus on serverless, CDN-heavy applications.  Running Next.js with DBOS Transact on DBOS Cloud unlocks additional benefits:
- Lightweight durable execution – DBOS [workflows](https://docs.dbos.dev/typescript/tutorials/workflow-tutorial) run to completion exactly once.
- Background tasks and WebSockets – Keep execution and state across UI calls, with the ability to send results back to the client.
- External systems integration – [Place calls to external services](https://docs.dbos.dev/typescript/tutorials/step-tutorial) with much simpler error recovery.
- Simple, powerful database integration – [Manage database data](https://docs.dbos.dev/typescript/tutorials/transaction-tutorial) with DBOS.
- Cron-style task scheduling – Automate recurring jobs with [cron-like scheduling](https://docs.dbos.dev/typescript/tutorials/scheduled-workflows).
- Built-in tracing and replay debugging – [Find workflows in the dashboard](https://docs.dbos.dev/cloud-tutorials/monitoring-dashboard) and [re-run them locally](https://docs.dbos.dev/cloud-tutorials/timetravel-debugging).

## Running DBOS Task Scheduler in DBOS Cloud

> Provisioning an instance of DBOS Task Scheduler in DBOS Cloud is easy:

Reviewer: I tried to run it and got this error:

```
2025-03-03 16:55:51.230389 [5aea11e8-8064-445e-bcb8-63fa48bce059] [info]: Starting migration: creating database nextjs_calendar if it does not exist 2025-03-03 16:55:51.277756 [5aea11e8-8064-445e-bcb8-63fa48bce059] [info]: Executing migration command: npx knex migrate:latest 2025-03-03 16:55:52.590872 [5aea11e8-8064-445e-bcb8-63fa48bce059] [info]: Creating DBOS tables and system database. 2025-03-03 16:55:54.423334 [5aea11e8-8064-445e-bcb8-63fa48bce059] [info]: Migration successful! 2025-03-03 16:57:12.648189 [be262a35-f65e-46a6-bf06-3ad84953eaaa] [fatal3]: [Log buffer retrieved after application became unresponsive]:Started dbos.service - DBOS Cloud application. Traces will be exported to http://otel-collector:4318/v1/traces Logs will be exported to http://otel-collector:4318/v1/logs > dbos-next-calendar@0.1.0 start > NODE_ENV=production node dist/src/server.js 2025-03-03 16:56:15 [version 1741020858] [info]: Loading database connection parameters from dbos-config.yaml 2025-03-03 16:56:15 [version 1741020858] [info]: Loading server files... Files in /dbos-application/application/dist/src/dbos: 4 Loaded: /dbos-application/application/dist/src/dbos/dbos_bored.js Loaded: /dbos-application/application/dist/src/dbos/dbtransactions.js Loaded: /dbos-application/application/dist/src/dbos/operations.js Loaded: /dbos-application/application/dist/src/dbos/tasks.js 2025-03-03 16:56:16 [version 1741020858] [info]: ...loaded. 2025-03-03 16:56:16 [version 1741020858] [info]: Launching... Traces will be exported to http://otel-collector:4318/v1/traces Logs will be exported to http://otel-collector:4318/v1/logs DBOSError: aws_region not specified in configuration aws_config at loadAWSConfigByName (/dbos-application/application/node_modules/@dbos-inc/aws-config/dist/index.js:41:15) at DBOS_SES.initialize (/dbos-application/application/node_modules/@dbos-inc/dbos-email-ses/dist/index.js:29:68) at DBOSExecutor.init (/dbos-application/application/node_modules/@dbos-inc/dbos-sdk/dist/src/dbos-executor.js:339:31) at process.processTicksAndRejections (node:internal/process/task_queues:105:5) at async DBOS.launch (/dbos-application/application/node_modules/@dbos-inc/dbos-sdk/dist/src/dbos.js:70:9) at async main (/dbos-application/application/dist/src/server.js:51:5) { dbosErrorCode: 1 } 2025-03-03 16:58:16.313446 [5c10731f-775a-45a5-950d-c875836eeeee] [fatal3]: [Log buffer retrieved after application became unresponsive]:Started dbos.service - DBOS Cloud application. Traces will be exported to http://otel-collector:4318/v1/traces Logs will be exported to http://otel-collector:4318/v1/logs > dbos-next-calendar@0.1.0 start > NODE_ENV=production node dist/src/server.js 2025-03-03 16:57:19 [version 1741020858] [info]: Loading database connection parameters from dbos-config.yaml 2025-03-03 16:57:19 [version 1741020858] [info]: Loading server files... Files in /dbos-application/application/dist/src/dbos: 4 Loaded: /dbos-application/application/dist/src/dbos/dbos_bored.js Loaded: /dbos-application/application/dist/src/dbos/dbtransactions.js Loaded: /dbos-application/application/dist/src/dbos/operations.js Loaded: /dbos-application/application/dist/src/dbos/tasks.js 2025-03-03 16:57:20 [version 1741020858] [info]: ...loaded. 2025-03-03 16:57:20 [version 1741020858] [info]: Launching... Traces will be exported to http://otel-collector:4318/v1/traces Logs will be exported to http://otel-collector:4318/v1/logs DBOSError: aws_region not specified in configuration aws_config at loadAWSConfigByName (/dbos-application/application/node_modules/@dbos-inc/aws-config/dist/index.js:41:15) at DBOS_SES.initialize (/dbos-application/application/node_modules/@dbos-inc/dbos-email-ses/dist/index.js:29:68) at DBOSExecutor.init (/dbos-application/application/node_modules/@dbos-inc/dbos-sdk/dist/src/dbos-executor.js:339:31) at process.processTicksAndRejections (node:internal/process/task_queues:105:5) at async DBOS.launch (/dbos-application/application/node_modules/@dbos-inc/dbos-sdk/dist/src/dbos.js:70:9) at async main (/dbos-application/application/dist/src/server.js:51:5) { dbosErrorCode: 1 }
```

Can we drop the email sending? It's very hard to set up and the app already showcases many other things.

Author: That's two questions - one is why it doesn't launch (email is supposed to be optional) and what we can drop to make it simpler.

First, the list of available activities was copied and added to `src/app/bored/db/activities.ts`.  Then the following code was set up in `src/app/api/boredactivity/route.ts` to handle the GET request for `api/boredactivity`:

```typescript
import { dbosBored } from '@/actions/bored';
import { NextResponse } from 'next/server';

export async function GET() {
  const dbb = await dbosBored();
  return NextResponse.json(dbb);
}
```

This route code then calls into the server action code:
```typescript
import { DBOSBored } from "@/dbos/operations";

export async function dbosBored() {
  return await DBOSBored.getActivity();
}
```

Which in turn calls the DBOS logic:
```typescript
export class DBOSBored {
  @DBOS.workflow()
  static async getActivity() : Promise<Activity> {
    const choice = Math.floor(await DBOSRandom.random() * activities.length);
    return activities[choice];
  }
}
```

Note that while this successfully registers the `/api/boredactivity` endpoint, it is fortunate that this API is simple... there is no API description or type checking code provided when using this method.

### DBOS Routes
DBOS provides a much simpler way to register API endpoints.

> By simply decorating a method with [`@DBOS.getAPI`](https://docs.dbos.dev/typescript/tutorials/requestsandevents/http-serving-tutorial), the API will be available, with built-in type checking, and available for OpenAPI support.  The following registers the API at `/dbos/boredapi/activity`:

Reviewer: Can we just use server actions here to simplify the overall architecture?

Author: No.  I do not recommend that.  There are a few serious users who are trying to offload the "heavy lifting" from Vercel onto fly.io, where this is actually supported.  They'll need APIs on that offload server, server actions don't meet that need.  So, we need some test for APIs.  I am going to argue this is as good a place as any, because having a lot of things in one app is teasing out compile / load bugs, and we're learning that some compiler/module/webpack/other project settings aren't compatible with doing all these things at once.

Reviewer: Then let's find some way to serve the routes from within Next.js instead of using our own server. Using our own server just adds complexity--now users have to worry about both the Next.js server and the DBOS server, and presumably they're serving on different ports.

Author: It does server routes from within Next.js.  Serving DBOS APIs is not a separate port, it's one server.

The server exists because of long-lived state:
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/53b5f3d2-6814-4530-bd00-832325b664ee)

The custom server gets around this, allowing DBOS to have background jobs, queues, and all those other wonderful things...
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/0ad9d4d2-3e7c-43c9-b778-89e5d4c16a1e)

Reviewer: Christ, we're going to need a really good guide to explain this

Reviewer: After seeing all this, I get how DBOS can theoretically serve from the custom server, but I still think that's brittle and potentially confusing. We're positioning DBOS as a library for reliability + durable execution, not a web framework. Would prefer to move away from `getApi` and recommend serving from within Next.

Reviewer: Because Next.js does provide the APIs for calling those workflows--which are just HTTP endpoints.  As I understand it, serving HTTP endpoints is one of the core features of Next.js, which is why I'm not comfortable with suggesting a different (non-Next) way to do it.
